DES MOINES – Hillary Rodham Clinton on Sunday urged President Obama to listen to congressional Democrats – particular the House minority leader, Nancy Pelosi – and make changes to the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal that reflect their concerns about protecting American jobs and wages.
In her first detailed comments on the trade deal since the House of Representatives refused on Friday to allow Mr. Obama to negotiate it freely, Mrs. Clinton laid out a far more calibrated position on the deal than many Democrats and Republicans have taken.
She declined to take sides on the Friday vote itself but instead allied herself with Democratic critics of the deal — without actually opposing it.
She argued that the House vote gave Mr. Obama “this amazing opportunity” to seek concessions from Pacific trading partners to salvage the deal.
“The president should listen to and work with his allies in Congress, starting with Nancy Pelosi, who have expressed their concerns about the impact that a weak agreement would have on our workers to make sure we get the best, strongest deal possible,” Mrs. Clinton said at a rally here.
“And if we don’t get it, there should be no deal,” she added.
Mrs. Clinton indicated that if she were president, she would not abandon the 12-nation Pacific trade deal – as some Democrats want – but would use the opposition in Congress as negotiating leverage.
“I am willing to try now to see whether you can push to get rid of the objectionable parts, to drive a harder bargain on some of the other parts,” Mrs. Clinton said at the rally, her first here as a candidate for the 2016 presidential nomination.
Mrs. Clinton has been criticized by Republicans and some Democrats for saying little about the Trans-Pacific Partnership deal in recent weeks, especially since she had made favorable comments about it as secretary of state.
She is facing many Democratic primary voters who have deep misgivings about trade agreements, including the North American Free Trade Agreement, or Nafta, that President Bill Clinton signed, and she faces rivals for the 2016 nomination like Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont who flatly oppose the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
A few hours before Mrs. Clinton’s remarks, Mr. Sanders repeated his challenge to her to oppose the trade agreement.
“I would hope that the secretary joins Elizabeth Warren, Sherrod Brown and the vast majority of Democrats in the Congress in saying, ‘No, we have got to defeat this piece of legislation,’ ” Mr. Sanders said on CBS’s “Face the Nation,” referring to fellow senators.
Without naming names, Mrs. Clinton sought to distinguish herself from Mr. Sanders and Ms. Warren, as well as from fervent supporters of the deal like some of the Republicans running for president.
“No president would be a tougher negotiator on behalf of American workers with either our trading partners or Republicans on Capitol Hill than I would be,” Mrs. Clinton said.
“There are the voices that are for the deal no matter what’s in it, and there are voices that are against the deal no matter what’s in it.
I kind of fall in the group that says, ‘Let’s find out what’s in it, and let’s make it as good as it can be before we make the decision.’”
Mrs. Clinton invoked Ms. Pelosi’s name twice during her remarks and appeared to agree with Ms. Pelosi that “there are some specifics in there that could and should be changed.”
She said she supported trade adjustment authority to protect American jobs, but otherwise did not delve into details.
“Let’s take the lemons and turn it into lemonade,” she said.
Later on Sunday, at a house party with Democrats in Burlington, Iowa, Mrs. Clinton was more explicit in challenging Mr. Obama by setting expectations for him to work with congressional Democrats on the trade deal.
Mrs. Clinton called Ms. Pelosi “as strong a supporter” as Mr. Obama has, and said she hoped Mr. Obama would “seize” the chance to work with Democrats to improve the trade pact.
“My view is the White House should call Nancy and a few other of the Democrats to say, ‘What would it take to get an agreement that would be better and not worse for American workers?’” Mrs. Clinton said, aligning herself with a potential future ally (Ms. Pelosi) over a lame-duck president.
“I have held my peace because I thought it was important for the Congress to have a full debate without thrusting presidential politics and candidates into it,” Mrs. Clinton added.
“But now I think the president and his team could have a chance to drive a harder bargain, because they are now in the position of saying to all of these other countries ‘we need to maximize the number of winners.’”