Hundreds of thousands of people across the country headed to Chick-fil-A restaurants on Wednesday, answering a call from Mike Huckabee, the former governor of Arkansas, to show support for the fast-food chain after the company’s president drew criticism for his opposition to same-sex marriage.
Long lines were seen outside Chick-fil-A restaurants nationwide, and many customers documented their visits on social media sites and shared their reasons for eating at the chain.
Many said they showed up because they agreed with the position of Chick-fil-A’s president on same-sex marriage, while others said they wanted to support freedom of expression for business owners.
As my colleagues Kim Severson and Robbie Brown report from Atlanta, where Chick-fil-A began in the 1940s, the president, Dan T. Cathy, made comments last month about the biblical arguments against homosexuality.
This prompted calls to boycott Chick-fil-A that were supported by the mayors of Boston and Chicago, along with plans for a same-sex kiss-in at the restaurants on Friday.
Last weekend, Mr. Huckabee used his television and radio programs, as well as Facebook, to help organize an appreciation day for Chick-fil-A on Wednesday.
More than 650,000 people signed up to participate, and tens of thousands “liked” photos of packed restaurants that Mr. Huckabee posted on his Facebook page on Wednesday.
Below are some of the photos shared Wednesday on Twitter from Chick-fil-A restaurants around the country.
Representative Michele Bachmann, Republican of Minnesota, shared a photo from her visit.
Last week, Sarah Palin posted a photo of her visit to a Chick-fil-A in California on her Facebook page.
Mr. Huckabee noted in regular audio updates Wednesday that Chick-fil-A did not participate in organizing the event.
And there were no tweets or photos about the appreciation day on the company’s Facebook or Twitter accounts.
In response to the outpouring of support for Chick-fil-A, many people used social media to share their disappointment.
One Facebook user who lives near Austin, Tex., posted this status update:
“It has been really disconcerting how many of my FB friends have stood up on the side of hate and proudly posted their photos of Chick-fil-a — and they all have their little quotes about how they ‘love their gay friends’ but they ‘don’t approve’ of their lifestyles.
So I am asking you kindly to please un-friend me — I have no use for friends like you.”
The Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation has asked supporters to donate the cost of a meal at a Chick-fil-A, about $6.50, to gay and lesbian rights groups.
Facebook users are also signing up to participate in a “National Same-Sex Kiss Day” planned for Friday at Chick-fil-A restaurants.
People are being encouraged to post photos of their kisses.
Others are not waiting until Friday to post their photos.