WASHINGTON — With just three weeks left for lawmakers to avert a fiscal crisis, President Obama and Speaker John A. Boehner met privately at the White House on Sunday as a top Republican senator suggested that his party should perhaps accede to Mr. Obama’s demand to raise the top tax rates so that the attention can shift to making serious cuts in benefit programs like Medicare and Medicaid.
Administration officials would not offer details of the discussion between Mr. Obama and Mr. Boehner.
But the disclosure of the meeting indicated that private discussions continue in the face of Republican leaders’ public statements deploring the lack of progress and the president’s refusal so far to specify the sort of deep, long-term reductions in spending for social programs that they insist upon as a condition of their support for raising taxes on high earners.
The White House and Mr. Boehner’s office issued identical statements afterward that said “the lines of communication remain open.”
The meeting was the first face-to-face negotiation between the president and the speaker since a session three weeks ago, when they were joined by the House Democratic leader, Nancy Pelosi of California; the Senate Democratic leader, Harry Reid of Nevada; and the Senate Republican leader, Mitch McConnell of Kentucky.
They were the first one-on-one deficit talks between Mr. Obama and Mr. Boehner since the summer of 2011, when the search for a “grand bargain” on taxes and spending ultimately failed.
The latest meeting gave rise to renewed optimism that a deal could be reached before the end of the month.
“My guess is still that we will reach a deal, but I do not think that anything is either certain or imminent,” Representative Tom Cole, an Oklahoma Republican and Boehner lieutenant, said Sunday night.
“If they reach a deal, I suspect the majority of our conference will support the speaker.
I hope the president can command equal support on his side of the aisle.”
Any optimism is a step forward from Friday, when Mr. Boehner told reporters that he did not have a progress report because there was “no progress to report.”
But the ups and downs of the search for a deal to avert a fiscal crisis have been in large measure for public consumption.
Between public statements and news conferences, the staffs of the president and the speaker have been in close contact.
Just hours before the White House meeting, Senator Bob Corker, Republican of Tennessee, said on “Fox News Sunday” that a small but growing group of Republicans had begun considering acquiescing on tax rates so that the negotiations could shift to entitlement programs.
Mr. Corker, a member of the Banking Committee who had presented a deficit-reduction plan of his own, said that if Republicans gave in to the president’s chief demand, then “all of a sudden the shift goes back to entitlements, and maybe it puts us in a place where we actually can do something that really saves the nation.”
Republicans have been insisting that the Obama administration agree to substantial savings in entitlement programs as the two sides negotiate how to narrow the country’s huge deficits.
But Mr. Corker is part of a group of Republicans who say the party will ultimately have to yield to the Obama demand of higher tax rates for top earners, potentially back to the levels that prevailed under President Bill Clinton.
That group of Republicans, Mr. Corker said on Fox, was beginning to realize “that we don’t have a lot of cards as it relates to the tax issue before year end” — but that a tax-rate concession could be converted, jujitsu style, into a tactical advantage.
Mr. Corker’s comments came as central figures on network news programs mixed cautious words of optimism over the negotiations between the White House and Congressional Republicans with dire warnings about what a failure to act might bring.
Christine Lagarde, the managing director of the International Monetary Fund, warned that such a failure was the gravest threat now facing the still-fragile United States economy — greater than the European debt crisis or any uncertainty in China.
“It would result in the stock market really taking a hit,” Ms. Lagarde said on the CNN program “State of the Union.”
The overall result could be zero growth next year, not the 2.1 percent growth rate projected by the I.M.F.
She called for a “balanced” agreement of both revenue increases and spending cuts.
That is a word Mr. Obama has often used to describe his preferred outcome.
Ms. Lagarde offered a tentative prediction that what she called American “pragmatism” would prevail and avert the worst outcome.